= Sample Rails app on Docker

== Configuration

=== Docker Engine

<code>Dockerfile</code> defines how a single Docker image is built.

Docker caches for each line in <code>Dockerfile</code>, and will check modifications of files and use the corresponding cache to skip steps and speed up rebuilding. Therefore, lines that changes more often (such as <code>Gemfile</code>) should be put after lines that changes less often (such as <code>apt-get install build-essential</code>)

In order to prevent the entire <code>Gemfile</code> to be <code>bundle install</code>ed when the Docker image is rebuilt, a seperate <code>Gemfile</code> is placed under <code>.docker</code> folder. This <code>Gemfile</code> should include essential gems and be relatively stable. In <code>Dockerfile</code>, it will be <code>bundle install</code>ed before the actual <code>Gemfile</code> and cached by Docker so that installing the actual <code>Gemfile</code> will be faster. The  contents and versions in this minimal <code>Gemfile</code> won't affect the app, since the app still relies on the actual one.

The following are parts of <code>Dockerfile</code> that should be configured, marked as <code>TODO</code>.

1. <code>FROM ruby:2.2-slim</code> defines the base Docker image to be used. Ruby images can be found at https://hub.docker.com/_/ruby

1. <code>ENV RAILS_ROOT /var/www/sample_app</code> defines where the app will run in the Docker container.

1. <code>RUN apt-get install -y mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev</code> installs non-RubyGems dependencies for <code>mysql2</code> gem. <code>pg</code> and older version of <code>nokogiri</code> required by rails also depend on non-RubyGems libraries.

1. Sometimes <code>bundle install</code> may fail before some particular tweaks are made. These tweaks can be placed here.

=== Docker Compose

<code>docker-compose.yml</code> defines how to organize multiple Docker containers as services into a single application, and allows for additional configurations for each container.

The following are the important labels in the file.

command::
  The command that will be run when the container starts. Overrides <code>COMMAND</code> in <code>Dockerfile</code>.
  Should be placed in brackets to be <code>exec</code>ed and keeps PID = 1.
  
env_file::
  The list of environment variables to be set. Sensitive strings such as database password can be place here.
  
ports::
  Expose ports of the container and provide mapping between ports of the Docker Engine (as in <code>dockerhost:*3000*</code>) and ports of the container (as in <code>rails s -p *3000*</code>)
  
  See "Usage" section for more about <code>dockerhost</code>
  
volumes::
  Mounts directories of the host system to the container.
  See "Volume Mounting" section for problems caused by this feature.

image::
  Directly use a Docker base image without a <code>Dockerfile</code> build
  
=== Database

In <code>config/database.yml</code>, <code>host</code> should be set to <code>db</code> to connect to the database service defined in <code>docker-compose.yml</code>

=== Ignore

<code>.dockerignore</code> defines files to be excluded when copied, etc in <code>Dockerfile</code>.

<code>.gitignore</code> should include <code>.docker/.env</code>.

== Usage

* Starts "Docker Quickstart Terminal" from Launchpad. After it completes startup it will display the current Docker IP address. It will be referred to as <code>[DockerHost]</code> later.

Alternatively, after the "Docker Quickstart Terminal" completes startup, an independent terminal with the following environment variables set (in <code>~/.bash_profile</code>, etc) will also work.

  export DOCKER_HOST=tcp://[DockerHost]:2376
  export DOCKER_CERT_PATH=/Users/<Username>/.docker/machine/machines/default
  export DOCKER_TLS_VERIFY=1
  export DOCKER_MACHINE_NAME=default

* Go to the app root directory, and run <code>docker-compose up</code>.

* Run <code>.docker/bash</code> to start a console in the app container for debugging, etc.

  Note that <code>.docker/bash -s db</code> connects to the database container.

* It might help to put <code>[DockerHost] dockerhost</code> in the <code>hosts</code> file.
